In 2016, this Japanese company issued a
public apology. For the first time in 25
years, they were hiking the price of a
popular ice cream by 10 yen or about 6
cents, and they were deeply sorry.
Now [music] in any other country this
might have been an overreaction but in
Japan.
[music]
>> Inflation is just completely alien as a
concept.
For three decades the [music] country
saw stagnant or even decreasing prices,
which is why a 10-y price hike for
[music] an ice cream was such a big
deal. But a huge slide in the yen is
helping [music] change that picture. And
it's causing a seismic shift in Japan's
economy. The yen has weakened against
the dollar to a level not seen since the
early9s.
>> The weaker yen means higher prices for
all sorts of imported [music] goods from
groceries to gasoline.
>> It's also making it pretty attractive
for inbound [music] tourists looking for
a cheap vacation.
Steering the country through this once
in a generation cost of living crisis is
the inaugural challenge for Japan's new
leader. Tanaya Takayishi has been voted
in as the Japan's first female prime
minister.
>> Japan has arrived at that big moment
[music]
where there's a potential transformation
of the entire society. [music]
So how did Japan get to this point and
can it learn to live with rising prices?
This unassuming grain has become
emblematic of one of Japan's biggest
challenges. It's very much sort of
entrenched in the Japanese psyche that
[music]
if you go to the supermarket, eggs are
going to be a certain price or rice is
going to be a certain price.
>> You can see that here. For years, the
price of rice in Japan barely changed
and sometimes [music]
it even dropped. But not anymore. The
price of rice has surged since 2023, and
the problem extends beyond what's on the
dinner table. Prices for energy,
transportation, [music] and housing have
all been on the rise.
>> If you live in the US or the UK, [music]
seeing prices rise is not as foreign a
concept as um it is in Japan.
>> This has been a terrible shock. We have
a whole generation of people who've
never seen prices go up. What is going
on?
Well, to answer that, you've got to
rewind to the 1980s.
>> After two decades of rocketing
expansion, the Japanese now enjoy the
highest standard of living in Asia.
[music]
Japan's economy was expected to overtake
America's. But around the late8s there
was a a bubble in asset markets and this
burst. [bell]
Asset prices plummeted, stocks
plummeted, property prices fell for more
than a decade.
>> Deflation layered on top of rising debt
and an aging population created a drag
that suppressed Japan's growth for
years.
>> Deflation is one [music] of the biggest
threats to Japan's economic recovery.
The exit strategy was to stimulate
inflation through extreme monetary
policy. The Bank of Japan or BOJ held
interest rates at rock bottom for
decades, even driving them negative. It
also bought huge amounts of government
debt that helped pour money into
financial markets. Both factors helped
weaken the yen sharply. But it didn't
move the needle enough. Salaries stayed
put, mortgages never budged, and price
tags remained frozen. Two massive forces
broke the cycle.
The first in 2020 when the world went
into lockdown, triggering a global
economic shock wave. And then there was
the Ukraine war. There was a big impact
from that as well. For a country like
Japan that imports most of its energy,
you're going to literally import
inflation.
>> Prices started rising and inflation
became sort of a thing.
>> Even so, Japan continued to keep
interest rates at rock bottom levels,
accelerating falls in the yen and
fueling yet more inflation.
In 2023, it exceeded 4%, double the
BOJ's 2% target. It was time to do
something. And finally, Japan put an end
to that massive money experiment.
>> The Bank of Japan hikes interest rates
for the first time since 2007 and
[music] scraps yield curve control.
>> All that pentup spending that didn't
happen during the pandemic now comes in
a big wave. So much so that in early
2025, Japan's inflation rate was the
highest among G7 countries. And this is
push companies great and small to
re-evaluate their business plans.
Costs have also increased for packaging
and [music] other materials.
[music]
As prices have risen, slow wage growth
has become a major concern.
>> I've talked to some, you know, small
business owners and they want to raise
wages, [music]
but being forced to do that has actually
added a lot of pressure for them as
well.
>> [music]
>> minimum wage has caught up or even
surpassed that depending on the
prefixure. So, Masashi Miwa is faced
with paying as much as 1,500 yen per
hour to attract quality staff.
While minimum wages have risen, they
haven't kept up with prices. You can see
that here. Wages adjusted for inflation,
also known as real wages, have [music]
actually been in decline.
>> This is why the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party, hasn't done as well
[music] in the past couple of elections.
>> We'll come back to what this means for
the new prime minister shortly, but
first, there's something worth
remembering.
Japan wants inflation. Policy makers in
Japan have been trying to generate
inflation for over a decade. [music]
>> The problem is that it doesn't want too
much or for it to [music] rise too
quickly. An appropriate amount turns
into a virtuous cycle. Prices rise.
[music]
People seek higher wages. People kind of
consume and spend more.
>> But that cycle hasn't arrived yet.
[music] and Prime Minister Takayichi
needs to maintain stability while
society and the economy adjust.
Policy makers have been trying to
sustain the patients of the consumers
and the voters by giving them subsidies
to keep the edge off the cost of living
crunch for the basics. These are kind of
countermeasures that have wide ranging
impacts on not just the economy but also
fiscal spending um revenue, government
revenue.
>> Because these subsidies don't come for
free, they're funded through borrowing
at a time when public debt is already
off the charts.
Japan [music] has the biggest national
debt load of any advanced nation, over
200% of GDP.
>> Pushing [music] interest rates higher
could help cool inflation. And the BOJ
did just that.
>> The Bank of Japan raising its benchmark
interest rate to the highest in 30
years.
>> Problem is,
>> it's going to make [music] servicing
that national debt more and more
expensive. The pace at which the Bank of
Japan raises interest rates has key
significance for the yen. So for
currency traders, [music] uh, companies
doing businesses, exporters, importers.
>> So it's tricky to say the least. And
Japan brings other unique complications
to the table.
>> Japan has an aging society. They're
reliant on pension incomes that are not
substantially enough to sustain them
through [music] after retirement life.
We've seen a large movement of money
from savings into stocks and this is
being facilitated by government policy
enabling people [music] to open accounts
where they get beneficial tax breaks.
>> You can see this shift in the stock
market in 2025. The nikke an index of
Japan's biggest companies hit a record
high.
>> If growth can be restored this means
these companies are going to be worth
investing in. The mindset of the
ordinary person in the street is that
inflation is a thing. Uh they have to
adjust their lives to it and Japan is
probably not going back to deflationary
stagnant prices anytime soon. So, the
key question for Japan's inflation story
is, [music] can the economy recreate the
innovation and the vibrancy it saw in
the late 1980s? Or is it risking the
stability and security it's had for a
future in which households can't keep up
with prices? And we see growing
inequality.
[music]
>> [music]